So hi, and welcome back! In this video we're going to be looking at how to restrict
the position of a spaceship, and this is
something you might have covered before.
Don't worry too much. We'll do a little
bit more this time in how to restrict it
based on the size of the view-port of
the actual camera size. So let's take
a look at our game to see what the actual
problem is. So now, I have a problem.
Look at that, my ship is going outside of
the play space. Well, we can't have that right, can we?
So how do we know what the
position to restrict is? Well, we can use
Mathf.clamp() to stop the
position from getting out of bound, but we
also need to use Camera.ViewportToWorldPoint() to work out the boundaries of
the play space. And that is a function and
we'll talk a little bit more about it in
context in the code. So if we jump back
into our code, we can see that, for example,
as we have right now, we have a little
increment that we add to the position of speed,
times Time.deltaTime.  It's  basically a frame rate independent speed added
to the X component of the position. Let
me show you a different way of doing
that. We've got a nicer, cleaner, easier
to read way of doing this, and I'm going
to show you that right now. So what we
can do, actually, is use transform.position
as before. So we're going to add a little
increment, just as we did
before. So that's +=, which is add to, and set it to that new value.
And then, we're going to use Vector3.left and Vector3.right.
So Vector3.right and left. Here we go. Those are predefined vectors that point
left, right, up, and down, so you've got left,
right, up, and down, and they are unit vectors.
They've got a length of one, and that is
something that we can use to create a
new vectored up points left. And so in
our case we've got a left pointing vector,
and we want to scale it by the speed.
that's frame rate independent. We can do
times speed times Time.deltaTime, and that will actually give us exactly the same
thing as we had before.
However, that's a little bit more readable. I
don't know which version you prefer.
Now, let me put the highlighting on both to
show you, but that's the difference of
the two and essentially they mean the
same thing. So we've got this new vector,
which we're constructing ourselves which
we're adding as an increment,
or we're using a predefined Vector3.left
vector and then multiplying it by the
speed and the time to make it frame rate independent. Now, I'm going to use
a new Vector3.left and Vector3.right, because what I think is more
obvious when we use that is the way the vector is going
and what direction its pointing in. So let's
start with that. Make sure it's going to
the right when you press the right arrow,
as it should be doing and that it's going
left when we press the left arrow, as we
are doing now. So awesome, now we've got
those two things going. Let's think about
the key problem here, which is
restricting the positions, the transform position, to a certain X value. So just
to begin with, I'm going to put an X max X min value as floating points here. So I've got
float xmin, and I'm going to say that's
going to be, let's say, -5 or
something. And then, float xmax is going
to be 5. Now, I don't know whether
these values are right. Basically, right
now, I'm just adding some placeholder
values, so we can give it code to run and
compile. And then, I'll tune those values
manually to see what looks about right.
And once I've finished tuning manually,
i'm going to use a function that talks to the camera to
figure out what the values of the
screen are itself, so I can make sure
that my play controller
always restricts according to the screen
size and not according to values we have
to type in ourselves. So let's get going. We have xmin and xmax, and we can
use those in our code, and what we want to do is clamp the X position of this
transform here. Now, we've  got a bunch of code here
that changes the transform position, and
once we are finish with that update,
we want to double check that the
X position is correct. So how we going to do that?
Well let's take a look at what the right
floater of the right transform position should be.
So firstly, let's extract the transform position from the
X value of the transform position, and let's
clamp it and create a new X position.
So let's do that like this. We've got a float,
which is the new new X, and the new X is the
clamp, so we are going to use Mathf.Clamp of the old position,
which is transform.position. Let me
check that I've got my arguments the right way around.
What does clamp take? Yep!
It's going to be transform dot, and it's going to be
position dot X. And then what's the
minimum? Well, that's going to be xmin, and the
maximum is going to be xmax. No surprises there. And what it means is new X
will be the transform position of the X
value of the transom position, but it
will be clamped to the minimum and
maximum we define, so it'll never be
below the minimum, and it'll never be
above the maximum.
So now we've got our clamped new X.
Let's make sure that we reset the exposition of our transform, which we do like this
We're going to reset the transform
say transform.position
= a new vector 3. I know this is a 2D game, but I'm using vector 3 math.
That's basically just to show you what
it would look like in three vectors.
We could actually use the vector 2, but we're using vector 3,
to show you that this kind of method of clamping also works in three dimensions.
You would just have to worry about different clamping parameters, for say the depth, etc.
So let's take a look. We've
got a new vector 3, and this vector 3 is going to be
constructed from new X , which is our float
for the X value. And then, we want our old
X and Y value, of rather Y and Z value, and we can use the Z value from the transform position itself.
The Y and Z values we can do transform dot position dot x y,
and then transform.position.z. Here we go,
so now this new position at the end
will be clamped in the X direction, by
the xmin and xmax setting. So let's do here, let's put a comment
restrict the player to the game space. Here
we go. So let's save that, jump into our game,
and see what it looks like. So if I press
play right now, what does that look like?
I can move, and then I'm stuck when I get
5. If you take a look at the Inspector.
I've got my player selected. You'll notice here I can go no further than 5, and
no further than -5. So I'm
moving around; I am clamped 5 and -5.
Now, we don't want to clamped to 5 and -5. Those are basically arbitrary. So in the next step,
we're going to look at how we use the camera to define the position of the maximum and minimum
position of the player. So let's jump
into our code. Let's pause the game.
Grab our MonodDevelop. Let's tidy up a
little bit. We don't want to have so much
white space. That was just to show off  the lines we were working on. So now we've got this stuff.
We'ere going to go back to our start function, which we deleted earlier, and we're going to go
to void Start. And in the start function,
we're going to be using the camera to bind
the player to the right limits. So we're going to calculate xmin and xmax, from the camera itself. So let's get
started. The first thing you need to do
is to get hold of the camera, and we can
do that by Camera.main. Camera.main is actually the main camera, and that will let us
act on the main camera. And this game is
quite simple, so we only have one main
camera, which is the is the 2D camera view
we have. In a more complex game you might
have several cameras. We don't worry
about it right now, because our game is
too simple. This will just work with a single
camera
so now we've got Camera.main. Camera.main will have a bunch of functions on it,
and if we can look at them we can
scroll down to see all the functions all
the attributes in the camera and the one
we want is in particular Viewport to
WorldPoint. Alright, so
Viewport to World Point actually takes in a WorldPoint and returns a WorldPoint coordinate.
So this method will actually take vector 3, so let's create a new vector 3.
However, the vector 3 it contains is a bit of a weird one. So the
the vector 3 contains... It's actually...
We've got to... Let's set it up right here
[Fumbles Words] So this is vector 3, and in there it's not X Y Z that we need to put in.
What we actually want to put in is a
vector where the first value
that would usually be X  is actually between 0 and 1. What would usually
be Y is between 0 and 1 as well, and
those are the X and Y coordinates
relative to the size of the screen. So let's see, my cursor is in the middle of the screen,
that would be 0.5 0.5. If my cursor
was at the bottom left of the screen,
that would be 00, and if my cursor
were at top right of the screen that
would be 11. And finally the Z
value is actually the distance between
the camera and the object you want to
find out. So basically, the camera will
give you a world point, but because it's
sometimes projected, sometimes you're
projecting a perspective camera into the
world, you need to know what object
you're going to be protecting against.
So the plane basically, you want to figure out
which plane you're projecting your point
on the screen to the point in the world space.
So let's get that going right now. It
doesn't matter so much in a 2D
orthographic camera, but we'll still need to do it, and I want to show you the method to do it,
so that you don't get confused and find
something weird going on when you try to
use the ViewportToWorldPoint in a 3d
world. So the first thing you want to do
is find out the Z distance, and
that's going to be a float. So the float Z
is going to be distance, and we can grab that by going transform.position.z
- camera.position. We can use
Camera.main to position.z, so
Camera.main.transform.position.z
So that's the distance. That's the distance
between the camera and the object.
We're talking about the player in this
case, which is where we want to clamp...  [Fumbles Words] the Viewport
coordinates to be mapped onto, so that
will be the distance and that will be
here. And we're going to put... what am I going to say? That's going to be distance, and we
also want to figure out the leftmost
side, so that's going to be 0 and we
don't care about the Y, because we're not clamping on Y, so that's going to be 0 as well.
So this entire thing here will actually be a vector 3
position in the world. So let's create that
and that's going to be the left most
position in the world. So we're going to
call it
Vector3 leftmost = this entire
thing down here. And we can do exactly
the same thing with the right-hand side, but
this time we're going to call...
going to call this rightmost, and in
this case I want you to take a few seconds to
figure out what those two values should be.
So we said
00 is the bottom-left corner. Let's see,
what would be the bottom-right corner?
What would be the bottom right corner,
given the the values of X and Y are relative
to the screen? So 0.5 is the
middle.
Have you figured it out? It would in fact be 10. So 10 is the bottom right-hand side,
right-hand corner, and that would be the
rightmost position. And now, what we can do is
find out, using the Vector 3's
leftmost and rightmost positions in the
world point coordinates, we can just grab those for xmin and xmax. So we can say xmin is
leftmost.x and xmax is rightmost.x
And we no longer need to set these guys
up. We no longer need to pre-calculate the version, because we're doing
that in the start function, and then, the
clamping should work as expected. So let
me save that. Then, build it to make sure
I've not made any compilation error, and
jump straight back into my code and
press play. So what happens here? I'm getting
to the edge, and I'm stopping. I'm pressing
and pressing and pressing, and you can
see that the value of the transform X position is actually being calculated in my code by
the camera, depending on what the size of
my camera is. So now, if I go to my right,
same thing happens. If I go to my left, same thing happens. Awesome! So that's totally working as
we expect! However, I don't want my player
character to be all the way to the
edge. So what I'm going to do, is I'm going
stop playing the game again, jump back
into my code, and add a little padding.
So I'm going to have a public float padding
and that's going to be 1. I'm just going to put 1, only 1 for my padding. And then, I'm
going to, from the left, I'm going to add
some padding, so that's going to be +
padding, and from the right, I'm going to
take away some padding, so that's going to be
- padding. So that way I've got a
little bit on the edges, so that my player
character... my player can at least
always see his ship. Let's take a look.
Press play again.
And indeed, the ship stops just a
little bit off the edge, so that it's still
always visible to the player. Awesome! Now, let's not forget to save this, and let's
review what we have done so far in this
video. So we've used
Mathf.clamp() to restrict the movement
of our ship, and then, we used the
Camera.ViewpointToWorldPoint() to work out the boundaries we needed to clamp our
ship to. And that is it for now. I hope you've
enjoyed the video, and I will see you very
soon another one. Bye.